I had the students do this scenario. I had a
gentleman that was a little bit strange, but he had
been a corps commander at one time. And he comes in
wearing a saber, and I'm thinking he's going to
really give us something. He pulls the saber out.
He's running around the classroom with that
saber, and I'm saying, is he going to stab
somebody? He got someone fired up in his
presentation. And I'm thinking, do I stop this or
what do I do? That was one of the most disconcerting
things that ever happened to me. Later it was kind
of funny, but at the time I'm thinking, he was so
pumped up and fired up, he was jabbing at this, he'd
say the Senate does this or the state does this. It
was sort of an anti-government kind of
presentation, even though he was supposed to be
successful in those kinds of things. I think he'd
probably just gone through a divorce and the
courts had ripped him out. That was a I've often
thought about, and that taught me a lesson about
what a person can bring into a class and what
they're going to do in a presentation. I've had
some fun times, too, when I'll have scenarios. One
time I said, all right, you've got to be creative
with your scenario. Well, here they come. My class
is right down the hall. Here they come carrying a
guy in on a gurney. Covered up. all this equipment
hanging off of him. Well, they had frozen him in
time. So he sets up with a sheet on his head, you
know, all white like a dead man. They pull the sheet
down and push a few buttons, you know, and he rubs
the stuff off his face, and then he goes into his,
you know, what's happened to the world since he was
frozen.
That was one of the great ones, I think. What
about...
Oh,
you know, we hear all kinds of stories about
excuses given. I, you know, I've never really had
any that come to mind that were absurd. I have
students who are coming, they can't make it
because the school board president called them,
they couldn't come the last second, or... I'm new
dog it eat my homework kind of stuff. I haven't had
much of that those kinds of things at this level. No
excuses. I try early on and say that you're gonna
miss a class. Professionals will have to do that.
Just let me know beforehand. I want you to bring a
tape recorder to one of your friends the week
before. Don't expect notes to do the job. I want you
to tape what goes on in class. And they've really
been good at that for the last 20 some odd years. So
unless I'm totally naive, I have not had much
problem with even worrying about excuses.
They'll commute from San Antonio quite often.
Three hours, that's a tough drive. Austin, quite
frequently. We have a doctoral program where we
have actually bypassed the University of Texas
because they didn't have an EDD program. They had
the old traditional PhD program. We got this
through the work of David Erlandson and some
others. We've got these awesome cohort
principals coming in here and doing their
doctorate. And their superintendent gives them
every other Friday off to do that.
But then I have students driving in from Waco
probably each week. as far as over in East Texas,
Beaumont.
Yes, yes. And now we're doing a cohort master's
program with Sy Ferry right on this side of
Houston. We have several from Prairie View in our
doctoral program in the community. That's a nice
run now, about 50 minutes with a 290 over. But the
other side of Houston, not much. They'll go to U of H
or Clear Lake. Well,
I think the research on culture and climate of
schools has got a lot of visibility. I've
developed some instruments on measuring
ambience or feeling. The research on a book that I
did on co-authored with Fenwick English and Betty
Steffi, Skills for 21st Century School Leaders,
Skills for Successful 21st Century School
Leaders, where we had to do a lot of research on what
the big issues were, what the research is telling
us about the kind of skills that leaders need. And I
think probably then the work, the research that
I've done on future studies and making it
applicable to success of individuals and
corporations, those areas. I've written quite a
bit in those areas.
Probably at Texas A&M since 75, I'd say
roughly 50, 55 maybe.
. Professor at UTA. He won the National
Dissertation Award. I'm sorry, UTSA, San
Antonio. I'm sorry, good point. Yeah, he's just
gone to University of Texas, San Antonio. His
dissertation was, and I don't take all the credit
for that, we co-chaired that, Jim McNamara and I
co-chaired it. It won the AERA Dissertation of the
Year Award and the NCPEA Professor's Year Award.
Very proud of him. Proud of John Wilson,
superintendent of schools down in Clear Creek.
Very proud of the Belton superintendent, Harold
Rahm. H-M? R-A-M-M,
yeah. And Jim Boyle, superintendent of schools in
Temple. They've done extremely well. I've got
students, a superintendent in Greenville,
students, deputy superintendents up in, two of
them up in Louisville. In fact, I'll be going up
there soon to work with that school. Those are some
of the notables. Others are in higher education,
different places. Elaine Wilmore. is running at
the UTA Arlington program as one of my proteges. So
those are some that I'm really proud of. Let's make
believe now you're the new consultant to the Texas
A&M administration as to what it ought to do about
for the College of Education. Okay. I think the
first thing the president and the provost In spite
of the, we have a university system initiative now
to create, make it possible to produce more
teachers and get the whole system involved in
that. But one of the first things I would do without
question is say this university, one of its
highest priorities, is to develop the finest
teachers that have ever been developed. That it's
an entire university responsibility. that the
sciences and the liberal arts, we're going to try
to select the best and brightest to come into
teaching. We're obviously going to push for
higher salaries. But we want the finest teaching
force. And I think the president, the provost, and
the other deans may fight that if they're going to
lose money. But if they weren't going to lose
money, I think they would get behind that. And same
thing for public school administrators. And work
with the College of Business, perhaps with
sociology and the Bush School on Public Affairs,
and develop a kind of leadership program for
schools that would be the best in the world. Okay,
now you're the consultant now to the College of
Education.
Okay. I think the College of Education right now,
in my opinion, exists, it has multiple missions,
but its primary mission is to improve the teaching
administration, counseling for public schools
of Texas and the nation. We have people majoring in
things in this college that has no interest in or no
link to public education. I would take a close look
at that and say if you're in a college of education,
we should be one way or another interested in using
our talents to make sure that every child in this
state had the kind of education that they
deserved, your child and other child. And that
everyone in this college is involved one way or
another. Whether you're an ed psych specialist
who's looking at some specific little element,
you ought to be looking at how that can improve
public schools and public education. And I would
not probably be a popular dean by doing that, But to
me, we've got to focus more on our primary mission,
and that's improving the schools of Texas. And in
doing so, we improve the private schools. We
improve, we develop professors that can go into
the other universities with the same mindset that
public schools are the primary thing. Even though
I might be able to write and do things that are not
related to improving schools, my primary mission
would be to help schools improve, be proud to be in
education, make sure that I had an impact on what
happened in the public schools of Texas. What
role, if any, should this department play in
regard to the homeschool trend and or the small
privacy? Well, our role, I think, is to encourage
any alternative that will help a child as long as
it's not violating the Constitution. As long as
these homeschool programs are helping children,
as long as private schools are helping children,
we should prepare leaders for those, teachers for
those, and be totally supportive of alternative
programs. Charter schools, more the better as
long as they really meet the state requirements
and give children alternatives and teachers
alternatives.
Okay, I hear the end. Do you think of some things we
haven't touched on? No, you've been very
thorough, very thorough. If we had all the people
in your A&M years here, to whom would you be
expressing your greatest gratitude and why?
Yeah. Well, first and foremost would have to be Dr.
Paul Hensarling. He pulled me away from science,
the National Science Foundation programs,
Somebody told me what a wonderful person he was,
and I came over and met him for about 30 minutes. I
changed my major. Because he said, John, science
is fine, but the excitement in the world in your
lifetime is going to be in education. You need to be
out front and be a part of that. He's the one that's
always told me to be better than you think you can
be. He's the one that took interest in Carolyn and
the family. He's the one that wrote beautifully
and contacted superintendents all over the state
when they accomplished something. They knew him.
He knew more people at that time in my life than
anybody. So he would have to be one. Dr. Bob
Randall, who came here as a young professor out of
the University of Texas, was just as country as he
could be, but he was brilliant in measurement. And
he had done some work on problem attack behavior
and decision making. And I didn't want to do
anything on how to keep your lunch line straight or
the bus routes in Texas. I wanted social science
because it just was really hot now in
understanding schools and school leadership.
And he let me come in on his research and dovetailed
on problem-attack behavior and its relationship
to the sex prior teaching experience and college
preparation of selected elementary school
principals, a proposal you read a few years ago.
Very instrumental in getting me into the
behavioral science research end of it and gearing
me really toward the research side of it. Those two
were very, very important to me. And then I think,
too, looking back on it, Chuck Sampson. and Marvin
Tate appointing me, you know, to the athletic
council. Because I was thinking about taking off,
doing a deanship thing and leaving A&M at the time
and that gave me a place to stay and I'll always
respect Chuck for that. I've had colleagues here
too that made it livable around here. Bob Stalkup,
who was here, who was in our position as a higher
education professor, who's now retired up in
Virginia. Dr. David Erlandson, whom I was
responsible for bringing here as chairing a
search committee after one year here. David is
very notable, I think. And Brian Cole. Brian, our
department head right now, is the model
department head. He's going to be involved
halftime with the president on the bonfire thing.
We've merged departments. He's very much into the
whole continuous improvement quality stuff. But
he has, where I had a disaster department head
before him. She had never been appointed, but she
was appointed over the wishes of us. The Stallings
had appointed her, even though the votes were
strong for another individual who left the
university. When Brian came in, there wasn't any
of this, I'm going to catch you doing something.
there was this, I'm going to help you succeed and
encourage you along the way. But it hadn't stopped
him from becoming well-known as well. So I guess in
terms of the campus itself,
those are the individuals that really stand out.
Another person that goes way back, who's long dead
now, John Millef. When I was an undergraduate
here, He told me when I was running around hell
raising, thinking about good bull stories that
later emerged. I remember one time I got to know him
through a friend of mine. I wasn't in veterinary
medicine. I remember he told me when I was
struggling trying to make grades to stay in
school. He says, John Hoyle, you've got what it
takes to graduate from Texas A&M. At the time, I
didn't believe him. At the end of the four years, I
walked down the steps. There he was. I didn't even,
I never had him as a prof. 1967, Ph.D., he was at the
bottom of the stairs. He and John and Ruth Milliff
were key players along those years, even though I
never had them. They were great mentors, great
people. And I went to see them in their failing
years, and I'll always respect that. What was his
nickname? It was Dr. Milliff to me. Is that right?
Yeah. I'm trying to remember. He was an icon. I was
just a little old nobody. In all these years, the
best moments, the joyful moments, what were some
of
those? I think probably graduation day in 1957,
mother and dad here, being the first boy with an
official degree. My sister was here and Carolyn.
We were married soon after that. joyous moment.
Finished the PhD was a joyous moment. They were
here and dad gave me a little briefcase I remember.
Professionally, of course, personally, in terms
of my children, all those kinds of things and
graduating, seeing them succeed, been very
joyous. And then last, last summer, being
selected by my colleagues around the nation for
the first Living Legend Award in our field. And
what an honor that was, not deserving, but one that
really was a joyous time. And there were people far
more scholarly, but somehow I lucked out and got
it. And we made it even more meaningful this year
when Jack Culbertson got it, who had created UCEA
and really been the father of our field the last 40
years. But those were joyous kinds of moments. And
I've gotten a couple of Distinguished Teaching
Awards here. that, you know, it's a great feeling,
but there's also others who deserved it that don't
get it because, I'm not saying it's political, but
it's such a timing thing sometimes, and anybody
who gets one of them deserves it, but there's so
many others who do, so I'm not sure it's a peer type
of thing, you know what I mean? It's a great award,
and I'm glad I got them, but the other things
brought me more joy. Let's make believe a stranger
walks up to you and hands you a check for a million
dollars with one condition. You must pass it on to
Texas A&M, but you've got to decide how they spend
the money. What would you ask them to do if you could
give them a million dollars? Yeah. If I could give
them a million dollars, I would obviously say that
school leadership is where I want it to be. I want to
be placed on school leadership. And I want to go in
and identify even at the high school level. Excuse
me. I would say let's identify some of your
outstanding young men and women in your high
school who have some aspirations for education.
And I would like to see that money spent on
scholarships, and to have a nurturing
environment when they enter the university, to
have them come all the way at four-year program
into education with their idea on being
principals or superintendents. And that's, to
me, that's where I wanted to go. Last question.
What feelings do you have in your heart for Texas
A&M today? I
love the institution dearly.
I'm glad I made the decision to get my doctorate
here, even though I was at Colorado University.
The only concern I have about Texas A&M, it's still
overwhelmingly traditional and conservative.
And where I'm a moderate, I sometimes clash with
some of the I
guess I would never, never tell a student not to
become a tech student. If they're interested, I'm
going to tell them this is the place to come. We've
got outstanding faculty here. We've had under Dr.
Bowen, I think we've had a good stable leadership
And the 2020 vision project, if Dr. Bowen and his
staff can sell that and make that work, that can
really be a great opportunity. But right now, I
don't see it grabbing hold. You know, the dreams
are there, but I don't see the action. I see the
faculty standing back and saying, well, this too
shall pass. I'd like to see it implemented and see
it happen.